GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is on
assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
judge in Baltimore declares a
hung jury for the first officer
charged in the death
of Freddie Gray.
Also ahead: near zero no more.
The Federal Reserve bank raises
interest rates for the
first time in nearly a decade.
Fact-checking the Republican
candidates at yesterday's
security-focused debate.
And how the musical duo Black
Violin is breaking stereotypes
by blending classical and
hip-hop.
KEV MARCUS, Black Violin: I look
like I should be a linebacker,
but to be a violinist, when
I realized that, I was just,
like, I love it. I'm drawn to
it. It's the thing that --
that's
why I wake up in the morning, is
to take the violin and kind of
change people's perceptions
about it.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Two major
stories tonight.
In Baltimore, a mistrial, a jury
deadlocked over the guilt or
innocence of a policeman
in the death-in-custody of
Freddie Gray. The incident last
April touched off violent
protests,
and six officers were charged.
This was the first case to go to
trial.
And the Federal Reserve is doing
something it hasn't done since
2006: It's raising interest
rates. Today's long-awaited
announcement hikes a key
short-term rate by a
quarter-point from
near zero. We will explore both
the Fed's decision and the
Baltimore mistrial, in full,
after the news summary.
In the day's other news, Wall
Street surged on the Fed's
reasoning that the economy is
finally strong enough to stand a
rate hike. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 224
points to close near 17750. The
Nasdaq rose 75 points, and the
S&P 500 added 29.
Public schools in Los Angeles
reopened today. Officials
canceled classes for 640,000
students
yesterday over an e-mailed
threat that cited bombs and
guns. It was later deemed a
hoax.
Students returning this morning
encountered stepped-up security,
and the school district's
decision was still a
topic of dispute.
KANIAH CHAPMAN, Student: I'm
really glad they did shut down
the school, because, for all
we know, it could have been our
school or any other school in --
around this district
that could have been bombed, and
a lot of kids would have gotten
hurt.
BLUE SANDEFUR, Parent: It didn't
inconvenience me, but I do think
that they overreacted.
I certainly think
they overreacted.
GWEN IFILL: New York City's
school system received a similar
threat, but it remained
open.
Schools all over Pakistan closed
today, marking one year since a
Taliban attack that killed
more than 140 people, nearly all
of them children. A special
ceremony in Peshawar began with
a moment of silence, honoring
those who died in the assault on
an army-run school. Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif addressed
today's crowd and promised
vengeance on behalf of the
victims.
In Yemen, a day-old cease-fire
appeared in peril, as continued
fighting killed at least
42 people. Clashes broke out in
five provinces, including around
the besieged city of Taiz
in Southwestern Yemen. Security
officials said shelling by
Houthi rebels killed six
civilians. They said field
commanders and fighters from
both sides were ignoring
cease-fire
orders. The violence threatened
to undermine peace talks in
Switzerland.
The Supreme Court of India is
laying down the law about air
pollution in New Delhi,
deemed the world's most polluted
city. The court today ordered a
three-month ban on sales
of large diesel vehicles,
imposed higher tolls for trucks,
and mandated that taxis switch
to natural gas.
Environmentalists welcomed the
moves, and urged India's
government to see that they're
put into effect.
WOMAN: They are going to look at
emission standards for vehicles,
pollution from power
plants, and public transport
strategy for the industry. It's
a great beginning, and
we just hope that this -- the
momentum that we're building up,
this should continue. We
must not slow down.
GWEN IFILL: Air pollution
contributes to more than 600,000
deaths each year across India.
The highest court in Japan dealt
a setback to advocates of gender
equality. A decision
today upheld a law that requires
married couples to use the same
surname. The law dates to
the 1800s. About 96 percent of
married women in Japan take
their husband's surname.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Freddie Gray case declared a
mistrial; what the Fed
rate hike means for the U.S.
economy; fact-checking the
Republican debate; and much
more.
Now to Baltimore and the
no-decision in the trial of
officer William Porter, for the
death
of Freddie Gray.
The jury deliberated 15 hours
over three days, but it
deadlocked on manslaughter and
other
charges. Gray's death in custody
touched off violent protests
last April. After news of
the mistrial today, protesters
gathered in downtown Baltimore.
And Mayor Stephanie
Rawlings-Blake appealed for
calm.
MD-BO STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE
(D), Mayor of Baltimore,
Maryland: Twelve Baltimore city
residents answered the solemn
call to serve. They listened to
the evidence presented and
they rendered a decision. If
some choose to protest, they
must peacefully demonstrate.
That is their right. But I also
want to be very, very clear
about any potential disturbances
in our city. We are
prepared to respond.
GWEN IFILL: William Porter was
the first of six officers to go
on trial in the case. In
a statement, Freddie Gray's
stepfather expressed confidence
in the proceedings, and he also
urged calm.
RICHARD SHIPLEY, Freddie Gray's
Stepfather: We want to thank
this hardworking jury for
their service to the public,
their quest for justice, and
their personal sacrifice for
their time and effort. We are
not at all upset with them.
Neither should the public be
upset.
They did the best they could.
GWEN IFILL: "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham has been in Baltimore
throughout the day today.
I spoke with him a short time
ago. He's outside the
courthouse.
William, thank you
for joining us.
I know you have spent the day in
Baltimore. What has been the
immediate reaction to the
news of the hung jury?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, when the
word came out outside the
courthouse today, it was like
a ripple went through the crowd.
And there were only about a few
dozen protesters that
were out here. They had
been waiting here all day.
And they were visibly upset.
People started chanting "Black
lives matter, put the racist
cops in jail, no justice, no
peace." I mean, there was a lot
of visceral, visceral anger
and disappointment that there
was no verdict reached today.
GWEN IFILL: So, William, is
there any reason that has been
given -- reasons for this
mistrial?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No, it's not
clear why the jury couldn't come
to a final decision.
And it's important to remember,
in this particular case, unlike
a lot of other police killing
cases that we have seen in
recent months, there is not
obvious evidence. There is no
dash-cam video to show exactly
what happened to Freddie Gray
when he went into the back
of that van and came out after
multiple stops around the city
of Baltimore in this near
fatal state.
So, those other cases were
clearer-cut. You could see a
police officer shooting a young
man. In this case, the evidence
is just not as crystal-clear.
But, that said, we still
don't know exactly why the jury
couldn't come to a final
decision.
GWEN IFILL: Now, as we
mentioned, this was the first of
six trials for six officers
involved
in that -- the events of that
day. Is there a sense that this
mistrial will endanger the
other prosecutions?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, there is
the possibility that that's the
case.
I mean, obviously, officer
Porter, the gentleman who was on
trial tonight, he was being
relied
on to testify in some subsequent
cases of the other officers
involved. We heard from
the lawyer for the Gray family
tonight, and they seem to think
that they would -- they
were still very confident that
the prosecution will be able to
go forward, that the other
police officers will be able
to be brought to justice.
And they refer to this simply as
a bump in the road, not anything
calamitous for the
case itself.
GWEN IFILL: And did the lawyer
for the Gray family join with
the mayor and the police
chief in calling for calm,
because this obviously was a
trigger last time?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Absolutely.
We heard that from them. We
heard that from a lot of people
here today, because everybody
remembers what happened back in
April right after Freddie Gray's
funeral, when the city
literally came apart at the
seams. Buildings were on fire.
People were venting very
visceral,
obvious anger at what they saw
had happened to that young man.
And so I think people are very
worried that that might happen
here if these subsequent
cases don't come to a verdict
that the community thinks is
legitimate.
GWEN IFILL: And a final
question, William. Can officer
Porter be tried again for the
same alleged crime?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes, my
understanding is that this -- if
he were to be tried again
-- and we're going to hear from
attorney Marilyn Mosby tomorrow,
we believe -- she will decide
whether she wants to appeal this
and try to re-prosecute him.
But there's no sense of double
jeopardy. If they appeal and
they can bring a second case
against him, I believe that will
be able to go forward. But we
will know more about that
tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: All right, William
Brangham for us tonight in
Baltimore, thank you.
Now, up it finally went. The
long-awaited and long-predicted
interest rate hike was
announced today by
the Federal Reserve.
This afternoon in Washington,
Fed Chair Janet Yellen explained
economic conditions were
ripe for the increase.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: The underlying health of
the U.S. economy, I consider to
be quite sound. I think it's a
myth that expansions die of old
age. I do not think that they
die
of old age. So, the fact that
this has been quite a long
expansion doesn't lead me to
believe that its one that has
-- its days are numbered.
GWEN IFILL: For a closer look at
today's rate hike, both in terms
of how the Fed makes its
decisions and what this move
might mean for your average
household budget, we turn to
David Wessel, director of the
Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
Monetary Policy at The Brookings
Institution, a nonpartisan
research center, and
contributing correspondent to
The Wall
Street Journal, and Tara Siegel
Bernard, personal finance
reporter at The New York Times.
David, welcome.
So, tell me. We have been
talking about this for a long
time. And as you just heard her
talk about the long expansion,
what took so long for them to
finally make such an incremental
move?
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: You sound impatient,
Gwen.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Well, I think that
the Fed has figured that
interest rates needed to be low
for a very long time because the
economy was very slow to recover
from a devastating recession,
and because part of their
strategy is to get inflation to
a 2 percent target. And they're
still not there.
So there was no reason to rush.
And now they have decided the
economy is healthy enough
for them to just to begin to
lift their foot gradually off
the accelerator.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned
inflation. She put in a little
caveat there that if things were
to begin to look southward, she
would consider going back down
again?
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
Well, what she said was what --
people want to know, what's the
Fed going to do next?
That's what really matters. A
quarter percentage point doesn't
matter much, but this is the
beginning of a longer process.
And what she said is, my
colleagues on the Fed expect
interest rates to go up perhaps
a full percentage point over the
next year, but we're only going
to do that if we're convinced
that inflation is
moving to our target.
And she was very careful to
leave herself a lot of
flexibility on that.
GWEN IFILL: Tara Siegel Bernard,
when we hear her talk about --
when we talk about 1 percentage
increase in interest rates over
the long -- over the next year,
what does that actually mean
for people's pocketbooks? What
does that mean for their ability
to buy a house or buy a
car?
MD-BO TARA SIEGEL BERNARD, The
New York Times: Well, the big
takeaway is that it doesn't
have that much of an
immediate impact.
We have only seen the rates rise
a quarter of a percentage point
today, and the Fed has
telegraphed that this is going
to be a very slow and gradual
increase. So, even if we
do get to 1 percent, yes, the
cost of borrowing will rise
marginally. You may be able to
get
a higher rate on a savings
account, but for now it's really
-- it's pretty much the status
quo for the most part.
GWEN IFILL: So, if you're a
retiree who's had a lot of your
money in C.D.s and conservative
investments, does this have any
immediate effect or does it make
you make a little bit
more money now?
TARA SIEGEL BERNARD: A teeny
tiny amount of more money.
(LAUGHTER)
TARA SIEGEL BERNARD: It's really
going to be a small amount for
people that are holding
C.D.s, people that have deposit
accounts at their local banks.
Don't wait for them to
immediately hike your rate. It's
probably not going to happen.
Banks are sitting on
a lot of deposits.
And what usually kind of prompts
them to raise their rate is to
attract more. So, right now,
they really don't need to. So,
you shouldn't expect an
immediate hike on your deposit
or
your C.D.s. That said, there are
institutions that have raised
their rates. You can find
a whopping 1 percent at
some online institutions.
So, the big takeaway is to shop
around. There are some better
opportunities, but it's still
pretty meager at the
end of the day.
GWEN IFILL: So, David, if this
is pretty meager at the end of
the day, are we talking about
the impact of this increase or
the trend line that it is
setting?
DAVID WESSEL: We're talking
about the trend line.
What Janet Yellen said today is
that they expect this to be
gradual. Because this is
such a big change in monetary
policy, because we have had
seven years of zero interest
rates,
almost unprecedented in American
history, she wants to be very
careful that she doesn't
throw the economy off balance.
So this was designed not to
upset anybody. And they
succeeded in that. But if the
economy
continues to get better, they
will ratchet rates up, and those
people you referred to
on C.D.s will be getting more
interest on their savings a year
from now, and people
will be paying more for
mortgages a year from now.
GWEN IFILL: Let's broaden this
out to the global economic
impact. David, are people
watching from around the world
what she does in this case as a
cue to what they do?
DAVID WESSEL: Absolutely.
Even more than ever, what the
Fed does really matters around
the world. There has been a
lot of anxiety, for instance, in
emerging markets. When rates
were low here, a lot of
money went to emerging markets.
It has started to come back. So,
emerging markets have to
manage their currencies very
carefully when the Fed is
moving.
China is changing the way it
manages its currency in
anticipation of the dollars
rising as the
Fed tightens. So, it has huge
impacts. And she referred that
today. She said the U.S.
economy is in pretty good shape,
getting better, but she's
worried about the rest of the
world.
Her judgment is that the U.S.
economy is strong enough to
offset the weakness abroad, but
that could change.
GWEN IFILL: Tara Siegel Bernard,
a lot of people have a
pocketful, especially at holiday
time, pocketful of credit cards,
which they are using liberally.
Does today's actions
affect how they treat their
credit standing, their credit
investment, their spending?
TARA SIEGEL BERNARD: Well, the
rate hike will jack up your
credit card interest rate a bit.
And pretty much in line with the
Fed's action today, people can
expect that to be reflected
in their credit card statements
within one to two billing
cycles. There are still -- if
people are carrying debt on
their credit cards and slowly
paying it off, now's the time to
find those last remaining zero
percent balance transfer offers,
and take advantage of those
now while they're
still available.
But rates will rise on credit
cards, variable rate cards, by
-- in line with the Fed.
GWEN IFILL: So, David, Wall
Street seemed to take this all
in stride today. They seemed
to see it coming. This gradual
buildup clearly had its effect,
its intended effect.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
It was by design.
So, I think when you score Janet
Yellen, how did she do, you
would say, A, they wanted
to prepare the markets for this
so there wouldn't be any uproar.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
DAVID WESSEL: In 1994, when the
Fed raised interest rates after
a long period of calm,
there was a big uproar in the
market. She succeeded in that.
I think her other goal was to
keep this committee that she
chairs, it's now 10 voters at
the
moment, unanimous, because when
you have got a big change, you
don't want a lot of dissent.
We know there are people who are
impatient who want rates to go
up faster. We know there
are others, even some governors
of the board, Dan Tarullo and
Lael Brainard, who expressed
some reservations about this.
So she must have worked very
hard to get them all to agree
that not everybody likes this,
but we're going to do this, and
let's do it all together because
it strengthens her hand
and her credibility.
GWEN IFILL: So, she's been there
in this chair for about two
years now.
DAVID WESSEL: Two years.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: How's she measuring
up? Because, as we know, the
Republicans complain that
she is -- that they don't like
the Fed. And the Democrats have
been -- had mixed response
to today's move.
DAVID WESSEL: Well, the -- yes,
Bernie Sanders and Gene
Sperling, who is an adviser to
Hillary
Clinton, they
criticized the move.
I noticed that Sheila Bair, who
used to be head of the FDIC,
praised it. I didn't see
any Republicans. But the
Republicans in general have
thought the Fed was keeping
interest
rates too low. I think that
this is her first big test.
Until now, she's basically been
following the game plan that Ben
Bernanke left her.
This was an important call, when
to start raising rates and how
to do it. And there
will be a series of calls like
this over the next year. She
will have to decide, did this
work out as I expected? Should I
continue to ratchet things up?
She has a real communications
problem, because she wants to
tell people rates are going up,
but she also wants to assure
them, if the economy
deteriorates, she won't do it,
and
everybody will complain
that she's confusing them.
GWEN IFILL: Must be fun to
be the chairman of the Fed.
David Wessel of the Brookings
Institution and The Wall Street
Journal, and Tara Siegel
Bernard of The New York Times,
thank you both very much.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
TARA SIEGEL BERNARD: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
sticking points in the
trillion-dollar budget bill; the
creator
of Humans of New York profiles
Syrians seeking refuge in the
Empire State; and classical
meets hip-hop in the
musical duo Black Violin.
But, first, nine candidates made
it to the main stage for the
final Republican debate
of the year. Four others
appeared in an earlier undercard
face off. The candidates left
Las
Vegas much as they arrived,
jockeying to survive into the
new year.
The cast of characters has
shifted, but there has been one
constant this Republican debate
season: front-runner
Donald Trump center stage.
Last night, the candidates
competed to prove who would be
best prepared as commander in
chief to keep the country safe.
For Trump, it meant defending
his plan to ban Muslims, at
least temporarily, from entering
the U.S.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We are not talking
about isolation. We're
talking about security. We're
not talking about religion.
We're talking about security.
GWEN IFILL: For former Florida
Governor Jeb Bush, it meant
seizing the opportunity to
try to take Trump down a peg.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Look, this is not a
serious proposal. In fact, it
will push the Muslim world, the
Arab world away from us, at a
time when we need to reengage
with them to be able to create a
strategy to destroy ISIS. He's a
chaos candidate. And
he'd be a chaos president. He
wouldn't be the commander in
chief we need to keep our
country safe.
GWEN IFILL: And for the rest,
the night was spent making the
case that they are, in fact,
qualified.
Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson,
who has stumbled over foreign
policy questions of late, said
he would take the fight to ISIS,
up to and including deploying
U.S. ground troops in
Syria.
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: You know, we have got
a phobia about boots on
the ground. If our military
experts say we need boots on the
ground, we should put boots
on the ground and recognize
there will be boots on the
ground, and they will be over
here, and they will be their
boots if we don't get them out
of there now.
GWEN IFILL: For two senators
recently on the rise, Marco
Rubio and Ted Cruz, the clashes
came over the tradeoff between
safety and surveillance.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: We are
now at a time when we need more
tools,
not less tools. And that tool we
lost, the metadata program, was
a valuable tool that
we no longer have
at our disposal.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: The old
program covered 20 percent to 30
percent
of phone numbers to search for
terrorists. The new program
covers nearly 100 percent.
That gives us greater ability to
stop acts of terrorism, and he
knows that that's the
case.
GWEN IFILL: They also scrapped
over immigration and border
security, with Rubio turning his
guns on Cruz to downplay his own
support for a 2013 Senate bill
that included a path to
citizenship for some
undocumented immigrants.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Does Ted Cruz
rule out ever legalizing people
that are in this country
illegally now?
QUESTION: Senator Cruz?
SEN. TED CRUZ: I have never
supported legalization.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO:
Will you rule it out?
SEN. TED CRUZ: I have never
supported legalization, and I do
not intend to support
legalization.
GWEN IFILL: For the non-senators
on stage, especially former
business executive Carly
Fiorina and New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie, the Cruz-Rubio
disagreement left room for
an outsider's attack.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Presidential
Candidate: We need a commander
in chief who has made
tough calls in tough times, and
stood up to be held accountable
over and over, not first-term
senators who've never made an
executive decision in their
life.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: This is
the difference between being a
governor
and being in a legislature. See,
because when something doesn't
work in New Jersey, they
look at me, say, why didn't it
get done? Why didn't you do it?
You have to be responsible
and accountable.
GWEN IFILL: The questions and
answers stuck close to matters
of terrorism and domestic
security. And the debate drew
another big audience, a hefty 18
million viewers. The
GOP candidates meet
next in mid-January.
Let's take a closer look now at
some of the claims made last
night, and try to separate
fact from fiction.
Angie Drobnic Holan is the
editor of PolitiFact, an
independent fact-checking Web
site and
a division of The Tampa Bay
Times. Her team recently took
stock of the statements they
have checked out so far this
election season. The takeaway?
No candidate has been completely
honest, Democrat or Republican.
Some fared worse than others.
For instance, out of more than
70 Donald Trump statements,
three-quarters of them proved
false. Jeb Bush tried to call
attention to that last night.
JEB BUSH: Look, two months ago,
Donald Trump said that ISIS
wasn't our fight, just two
months ago. He said that Hillary
Clinton would be a great
negotiate with Iran. And he gets
his foreign policy experience
from the shows. That's not a
serious kind of candidate.
GWEN IFILL: Other -- from the
amusement watching Donald
Trump's faces while that
accusation
was being made. Is it true that
Donald Trump said those things?
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN, Editor,
PolitiFact: You know, we rated
that mostly true.
He did make the comments about
ISIS not being our fight. Now,
his most on-point comments
were more than like five months
ago, rather than just two. Now,
looking at Donald Trump's
statements about foreign policy,
he seems to go back and forth
between saying the U.S.
should hit ISIS very hard and
saying the U.S. needs not to get
too entangled in foreign
affairs.
So, there is some
dissonance there.
GWEN IFILL: When you talk about
dissonance, I just want to
follow up a little bit more
on what you found overall
looking at Donald Trump's
statements. That's a big number
of
false statements.
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: Yes. We
haven't fact-checked anyone as
many times as we have
fact-checked
Donald Trump with so much
inaccuracy. He just gets a lot
of factual matters incorrect.
GWEN IFILL: And it
doesn't seem to hurt.
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: Well,
voters have not gone to the
polls yet, is what I say. So,
we will see.
GWEN IFILL: Let's move on to Ted
Cruz. He was asked whether he --
how he disagreed with
Trump, and his response was to
change the subject. Let's
listen.
SEN. TED CRUZ: We're looking at
a president who's engaged in
this double-speak where he
doesn't call radical Islamic
terrorism by its name. Indeed,
he gives a speech after
the San Bernardino attack where
his approach is to try to go
after the constitutional rights
of law-abiding citizens
rather than to keep us safe.
And even worse, President Obama
and Hillary Clinton are
proposing bringing tens of
thousands
of Syrian refugees to this
country when the head of the FBI
has told Congress they cannot
vet those refugees.
GWEN IFILL: Now, it is true that
the president doesn't use the
word -- the phrase radical
Islamic terrorism. He kind of
goes out of his way not to use
that phrase for lots of
reason. But is it true that he
has dropped the ball, that the
administration has dropped
the ball on vetting refugees?
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: We looked
at Cruz's statement that Comey
said they can't vet Syrian
refugees.
GWEN IFILL: The FBI director.
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN:
That's correct.
We rated Cruz's statement mostly
false. There is a vetting
process for the Syrian refugees.
It's actually somewhat
extensive. It's more than, say,
a tourist visa would go through.
The United Nations certifies
refugees overseas. And then the
U.S. government puts the
refugees
through a number of checks, such
as from the Defense Department,
Homeland Security Department,
State Department.
Now, we rated it mostly false
because Comey did say he could
not personally certify that
every refugee didn't represent a
security check. That's the
standard the Republicans
in Congress wanted him to meet.
He said that that wasn't
feasible, but they do have a
standard
vetting process that the
refugees go through.
GWEN IFILL: That's interesting,
because the Congress said they
were going to do something
about that, but that wasn't
included in the budget bill that
passed in Congress.
Let's move on to the other big,
I guess, fact-checkable moment
of the night, where Senator Rand
Paul
accused Senator Rubio -- there
were three senators on the stage
last night -- that -- he
said of opposing increased
border security. Let's listen.
SEN. RAND PAUL (R-KY),
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: So Marco
can't have it both ways. He
thinks
he wants to be this, "Oh, I'm
great and strong on national
defense."
But he's the weakest of all the
candidates on immigration. He is
the one for an open
border that is leaving us
defenseless. If we want to
defend the country, we have to
defend against who's coming in,
and Marco is -- has more of an
allegiance to Chuck Schumer
and to the liberals than he
does to conservative policy.
GWEN IFILL: I guess we can
interpret that look on Marco
Rubio's face that he doesn't
believe it's true.
What did you think?
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: Well,
PolitiFact didn't think it was
true either. We rated Rand
Paul's
statement that Marco Rubio
supports open borders as Pants
on Fire. That's our worst
rating,
not only false, but ridiculous.
And the reason we rated is this
way that Marco Rubio has
supported this comprehensive
immigration
legislation. It passed in the
Senate. It failed in the House.
It never became law. It included
money and border agents
to increase security.
Open borders implies that the --
there would be a border where
people could come back and
forth freely with very minimal
checks. That's not at all what
Marco Rubio has supported.
You know, Rand Paul may have a
point that Rubio supported this
immigration legislation
when other candidates didn't.
But to say he supports open
borders just crosses the line
and is really at odds with what
the
legislation contained.
GWEN IFILL: We have talked
before about how -- the tenuous
relationship between the truth
and fact in this year's election
so far on both sides of the
aisle.
I think the viewers would be
interested in knowing, how do
you do this, how you vet them,
especially with nine candidates
on the main stage last night,
four candidates on the
undercard,
and then another three
candidates on the Democratic
side.
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: You know,
we're looking for claims that we
think voters would care
about and that would make them
say, I wonder if that's true.
So, we're definitely using our
news judgment. We don't do a
random sample or pick statements
out of the hat. We are looking
for what's most important and
significant to voters.
So, after we watch a debate like
last night, we just think, what
would people be talking
about? What would they
be wondering about?
So, we fact-check statements
about immigration, about ISIS,
about national security. Those
were the topics from this week.
GWEN IFILL: And what kind of
feedback do you get from
viewers, readers, or candidates?
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN: We get a
lot of reader feedback that is
thanking us for checking
the facts. And then we get
reader feedback that says, oh,
you're biased against the
candidate
that I like.
So, we get both.
GWEN IFILL: Both of them. Well,
if you're getting them both,
then you're probably somewhere
right in the middle.
Angie Drobnic Holan, editor
of PolitiFact, thanks again.
ANGIE DROBNIC HOLAN:
Thanks for having me.
GWEN IFILL: As the candidates
tangled last night, members of
Congress were shaking hands
in Washington, as leaders agreed
to a sweeping deal to fund the
government and extend dozens
of tax breaks.
Attached to all of that are a
slew of other issues, from
immigration to oil.
Speaker Paul Ryan said both
parties made concessions.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: Republicans didn't
get all that we wanted.
Democrats didn't get all that we
-- we wanted. This is a
bipartisan compromise. It's a
bicameral
compromise. And I understand
that some people don't like some
of the aspects of this, but
that is the compromise
that we have.
GWEN IFILL: Political director
Lisa Desjardins has been digging
into the deal, and she joins
us now live from Capitol Hill.
Lisa, it's so interesting to
hear Paul Ryan talk about a
bipartisan agreement. Before
we get into the details of that
agreement, how unusual is it for
both parties to agree
on something this big anymore?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, they used
to do this only by force. We
used to run right up to
and sometimes across a
government shutdown to do this.
I think what's really unusual
here, Gwen, is, for the past
years, we have seen all of
these collisions result in no
one getting anything, everyone
sticking to their hard
lines. But here, what we see is
both sides getting something, in
fact, a lot of something,
ahead of the holiday break.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's start by
talking about the cyber-security
provisions in this, which
actually got tougher,
it seemed to me.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
This cyber-security bill has
been a controversial idea for
the past year. And I'm going to
talk
about why it is a controversial
provision. Supporters say that
this bill would allow
businesses to send data about
specific hacks to the federal
government, and then, from
there, the government could
alert other businesses. So, if
Target was hacked, they would
tell
the NSA, the NSA would
alert other businesses.
They say those companies would
share that data voluntarily.
What about critics? Well,
critics say, that's fine, but
the truth is that the government
could hold on to that
data, and as much as the data is
not supposed to be our personal
information, it's very
possible that it could be. And
once the government got that
data, Gwen, the critics say this
law would allow them to use it
for some prosecutorial aspects,
not just on cyber-security, but
everything
from espionage to child
exploitation, things, of course,
that the government does want to
prosecute, but things that those
who are worried about civil
liberties say opens a vast door
to government surveillance.
One thing about this, Gwen, it
splits the business community
itself. Retailers and financial
companies, they really like
this. They say it's needed. But
those who are involved in
technology, especially Silicon
Valley, Facebook, Apple, they
don't like it at all. They think
it's a bad idea.
GWEN IFILL: Let's move to the
energy trade-off, the deal that
they cut. The Democrats were
happy for some of it,
Republicans for others, for
other parts.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
This is what I mean by some --
each side got a little bit
of something.
So, here's what the energy
trade-off was in this bill.
First of all, for Republicans,
they got a reversal of a 40-year
ban on exporting oil. That is a
very big deal for them, and
especially a very big deal for
oil, for drilling here in this
country.
Democrats, on the other hand,
got something that they want.
They got extended solar and
wind tax credits. Those will be
extended over the next five
years. That's something the
Republicans had talked
about completely ending.
So, here, you see some this sort
of -- some of the environment
and the energy sector gaining,
both sides here. Everyone liked
something and didn't like
something as far as the energy
portion of this bill goes.
GWEN IFILL: There was another
part of the bill which I found
interesting, because it
showed lobbying working, but it
was unconventional lobbying.
The comedian Jon Stewart went to
Capitol Hill and he pushed for a
9/11 first-responders
protection bill, which he
actually confronted members of
the Senate and House face to
face,
and this survived.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
He really became a leading force
in that bill. It was an
emotional bill talking about the
60,000 or so first-responders
whose insurance doesn't cover
all of their care. Now, this
bill that would have covered the
rest of it expired, Gwen, in
September. Jon Stewart has
been a very strong advocate. And
we have also seen, of course, a
large amount of lobbying
from the New York
delegation here as well.
So this bill in full went into
the omnibus. That's what I mean.
This bill just contains
so much that will affect a great
number of lives, including that
of first-responders
in New York City.
GWEN IFILL: And we probably just
scratched the surface of it, but
you did it very well.
Thank you very much, Lisa
Desjardins, for us on Capitol
Hill tonight.
LISA DESJARDINS: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: As you have been
hearing, there has been plenty
of political debate about
immigration policy, about
refugees and security fears.
Now we're going to hear the case
for helping refugees. Their
plight is the center of a
big push on social media and the
Web this week. It comes from a
popular blog and Web
site whose creator and founder
says he's been more affected by
these stories than thousands
of others he's told.
Hari Sreenivasan has our
story from New York.
BRANDON STANTON, Humans of New
York: My name is Brandon
Stanton. I run the Web site
Humans
of New York. And I stop random
people on the streets of New
York City, and I learn their
stories.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In five years,
Brandon Stanton has learned and
shared the stories of thousands
of people.
So, how often do you
shoot? Every day?
BRANDON STANTON: Every day, yes.
I got to keep the blog going. If
I ever -- if I stop
shooting, the blog stops.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
blog doesn't stop.
Sixteen million people see his
portraits and the captions that
go with them on Facebook.
Another 4.4 million follow
along on Instagram.
BRANDON STANTON: I'm never
really looking for the thing
that makes somebody the same
as everybody else, because I
have interviewed 10,000 people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
BRANDON STANTON: So, in order to
keep my blog interesting, I need
to find something different
about that person than about the
other 10,000 people I have
interviewed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are you ever
amazed by how much a stranger is
willing to share with you?
BRANDON STANTON: Oh, always.
When I first started, I didn't
even think a stranger would let
me take their photo.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
BRANDON STANTON: Now, I have
done it so much, I almost walk
up to people with the
expectation
that, after a few minutes, we're
going to be talking about
something deeply personal
that they might not have
told anyone else in years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Every so
often, the story of one of
Stanton's subjects will resonate
with thousands, and lead
to something bigger.
BRANDON STANTON: There was a
story of young man that I met in
Brownsville, Brooklyn, that
he ended up telling me about his
principal, and we ended up
raising $1.5 million for his
school.
There was a story in Pakistan
about a woman who was battling
slave labor that we ended
up raising $2.5 million for. So
there are some stories that have
been so powerful that
they have spilled over, and had
some sort of larger impact.
HARI SREENIVASAN: His work has
resulted in two bestselling
books, which have helped him
tell people's stories from
20 different countries.
Recently, Stanton traveled to
Turkey and Jordan to visit
refugees.
BRANDON STANTON: Being a refugee
is awful. And that's one of the
-- my eyes have been
opened so much to what
these people go through.
These people are stuck in
Turkey, stuck in Jordan,
millions of them. They're not
allowed
to work. They don't have
benefits. They have no money.
They're getting, I don't know,
dollars
a month.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stanton met
with 12 families, part of the
10,000 refugees bound for
America,
who had passed the lengthy
screening process through the
UNHCR and multiple U.S.
intelligence
agencies.
What are their perceptions of
and what are their hopes for
their lives when they get
here?
BRANDON STANTON: Existing, being
on the radar, having an I.D.,
having a passport, being a
citizen, being in a place where
your labor and your effort will
actually lead to results.
They are not allowed to do
anything as a refugee. You have
no options to move your life
forward.
All you do is suffer and wait.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just this past
week, one of those stories
reached the White House.
President Obama commented on a
photo of a scientist profiled by
Stanton, saying, "You're
part of what makes
America great."
BRANDON STANTON: And I'm meeting
these families, and all of them
are extremely exceptional
in some way. Either they have
very bad health conditions that
need immediate attention,
they have handicapped children,
or they have Ph.D.s. They're
extremely highly educated.
And I came to realize how
selective America was being
about who they let in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On Sunday,
Stanton began sharing a story he
didn't expect. While helping
translate the stories of the
dozen families he was speaking
with, he found out the deep
suffering his own interpreter
has already endured. Her name is
Aya Abdullah.
BRANDON STANTON: She is a victim
of both the Iraq and Syrian
wars. She grew up in Iraq.
She was about 7 when the war
came. Her entire neighborhood
was destroyed. Her best friend
was cut in half by a bomb and
died in front of Aya's eyes. She
had to watch that.
A car bomb exploded in front of
her when she was about 10 or 11,
and she had to help her
father pick out survivors
on the side of the road.
HARI SREENIVASAN: To escape,
Aya's family fled to Syria, but,
within a year, war found
them again, and they fled to
Turkey. Her father has now
disappeared, leaving Aya to take
care
of her three siblings and
her shell-shocked mother.
Aya applied for refugee status
four years ago, went through all
the interviews, in hopes
that she could start over in the
United States. In September, Aya
was told she and her family
would be accepted into
the United States.
We spoke to her via Skype.
AYA ABDULLAH, Refugee: We were
dancing, all the family, and
doing some music, because
we just tell ourselves that we
are going to go to a new life, a
new country. We start
to just -- to be ready to go.
And we just, like, buy new
things to have it with us and
everything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But
that joy was short-lived.
So, you had your bags packed.
And then what happened?
AYA ABDULLAH: Yes.
And what happened, that, in
December, we just get the
message that we just have --
rejected
from America. That's it. That's
feel that you just build dreams,
and there's someone
come and destroy that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Her rejection
letter offers no specific reason
why. Aya is appealing.
She understands that there is
currently a fear in the United
States of refugees from
Syria.
AYA ABDULLAH: We're not
dangerous. We just escaped from
wars to go to a safer place.
We're not going to do something
bad in your country.
But I hope that -- as a refugee,
I told the people that Muslim
people and Arabic people
and refugees are not bad people.
This is the message that I want
to give.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Brandon is
using the reach of his stories
to put a face on those
refugees left behind.
BRANDON STANTON: Yes, she's just
one person. But she's also
representative of so many people
that are in a similar situation
that don't have the benefit of
speaking English, that
don't have the benefit of
speaking for themselves and
telling their own stories.
These are smart, educated people
who through no fault of their
own are just languishing
in near homelessness in
countries that, honestly, a lot
of people don't want them there.
They're
facing discrimination. Aya has
been hit by a car. Her sister's
teeth have been knocked
out. They get shouted out on the
street and they have nowhere to
go.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He's concerned
that, if Aya's appeal is not
approved, she will be
left to move to Iraq
and marry a cousin.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Hari Sreenivasan, New York.
GWEN IFILL: Stanton has started
an online petition to support
Aya's appeal. The petition
has more than 800,000
signatures. Stanton's goal is
one million. You can see more of
her
story on our Web site
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Next: where Bach meets hip-hop,
with a strong message about
stereotyping.
Jeffrey Brown looks at the
musical group Black Violin.
JEFFREY BROWN: Wil Baptiste and
Kev Marcus, members of Black
Violin, two former high school
orchestra nerds. That's how they
met. But, also, by their own
description, two 6'2''
black men who are eager to
change perceptions about who
plays what when it comes to
music.
Their new album is
titled "Stereotypes."
WIL BAPTISTE, Black Violin: I
think that's probably the main
agenda, right? You think
of...
JEFFREY BROWN: You
use the word agenda?
WIL BAPTISTE: Yes, I think so.
If you look at us, we don't look
like your typical violinists. We
talk to the kids all
the time, and the kids love us
just because we can relate to
them, so to speak. And that's
what it's all about,
breaking stereotypes.
KEV MARCUS, Black Violin: I look
like I should be a linebacker,
but to be a violinist, when
I realized that, I was just,
like, I love it. I'm drawn to
it. It's the thing that --
that's
why I wake up in the morning, is
to take the violin and kind of
change people's perceptions
about it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Blending
classical music with hip-hop,
traditional instruments, Marcus
on
violin, Baptiste on viola, with
contemporary backup, Black
Violin is reaching audiences
around the country.
We met them recently at the
Publick Playhouse in Cheverly,
Maryland. They have played the
Apollo Theater in Harlem. They
met with American troops in
Iraq, and have opened for top
pop
stars, including Alicia Keys.
It all began in an ordinary,
even accidental, way at Dillard
High School for the Performing
Arts in Fort
Lauderdale, Florida.
Was it your choice to
pick up the viola?
KEV MARCUS: No. My mom
made me do it, actually.
(LAUGHTER)
KEV MARCUS: But now I thank her
every day. I mean, 25 years
later, I can't believe I'm
still playing this instrument.
WIL BAPTISTE: To be quite
honest, I didn't want to pick it
up. I wanted to play the
saxophone.
They put me in the wrong class.
That's my story. True story.
(LAUGHTER)
WIL BAPTISTE: But I'm grateful
now that I have -- you know,
Black Saxophone just doesn't
have the same ring
to it, you know?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: You were telling
me, Wil, earlier, about high
school, the rigor of the
training,
right? You were always playing.
WIL BAPTISTE: Always playing.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Playing in
orchestra, playing in quartets,
concerts all the time.
WIL BAPTISTE: Exactly, concert
every weekend. We had a viola
technique class, chamber music,
orchestra, youth orchestra.
I mean, you know, we had a ton
of classes, but that was the
really, really good thing.
At the time, it was very like,
ah, I have got another concert,
I have got another -- you
know, got to rehearse.
JEFFREY BROWN: The genre-bending
music they play today is a
direct fusion of their musical
training and passions.
KEV MARCUS: Think of it this
way. We studied classical, but
we lived rap music. So...
JEFFREY BROWN: You studied
one and you lived the other.
(CROSSTALK)
KEV MARCUS: And lived the other.
So, second period every day,
we'd play Bach and Beethoven and
Mozart, but, on the way
to third period, we'd be
listening to Biggie or Tupac or
whatever we liked at the time,
whatever was hot.
So, when it came time to blend
them together, we did it so
naturally and so seamlessly that
it didn't even seem like we were
doing anything groundbreaking at
the time. We were just naturally
-- I would hear that hip-hop
beat and pick up our violins and
play to it.
WIL BAPTISTE: We're bridging two
worlds together. We're bridging
hip-hop and classical and jazz
and funk.
And what that does is, to me,
particularly with the kids, it
just -- to them, they're
like, oh, my God, this looks
incredible. It sounds
incredible. It looks impossible.
Maybe
I can do this with literature,
art, science, or anything that I
have a passion for.
JEFFREY BROWN: A Black Violin
concert is a dancing, even
shouting affair. They play their
own compositions, such
as the song "Invisible."
WIL BAPTISTE: I need you guys to
help me out. I'm not invisible.
Clap your hands. Come on.
I'm not invisible.
JEFFREY BROWN: And cover hits
like Ed Sheeran's "Thinking Out
Loud."
(SINGING)
JEFFREY BROWN: But there are
also slightly older hits, like
Bach's Brandenburg Concertos.
KEV MARCUS: Bach, to me, is the
equalizer. Beethoven, I just --
anything late Beethoven
as far as chamber music is
concerned, I just love. I'm very
excited about classical music.
I think what we do is just
different. It's not -- it
doesn't elevate it. It's just
different
from classical, just like it's
different from hip-hop. We get
to create our own lane and
walk in it on our own, and
hopefully others follow.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, because the
question is how does Bach and
what does Bach say to Jay-Z
or Tupac? What are they
saying to one another?
WIL BAPTISTE: Honestly, I think,
if Bach were here today, he
would say, good job, fellows,
because, honestly, if you think
about -- if you think about
classical and hip-hop, they're
not so different.
In the Bach world, back in those
days, I mean, someone would pay
Bach to write a specific
piece for a banquet or a party.
You know what I'm saying? Bach
was the producer at that
time, the hip-hop producer, so
to speak, at that time. So it's
not so different from today's
age right now. You
know what I mean?
So, there's a lot
of similarities.
JEFFREY BROWN: I'm not sure I
have heard that before. Bach is
a hip-hop producer of his
time.
Braxton Saint Hill (ph), age 7,
part of the Washington, D.C.,
Youth Orchestra, was immersed
in the concert from the front
row. His mother, Anhela (ph),
told us he'd had a bad cold,
but wasn't going to miss this.
BOY: Hey, Black Violin, when I
get as old as you, I'm going to
play too with you. All
right. Bye, Black Violin.
JEFFREY BROWN: Earlier, I had
asked Wil Baptiste and Kev
Marcus where they hope this all
leads.
WIL BAPTISTE: I think a lot of
kids are now open to listening
to a Mozart piece or a Beethoven
piece because of what we do.
So, I think we're creating --
and also hip-hop as well, the
true essence of hip-hop, which
is creativity. Someone that
would never listen to hip-hop is
seeing hip-hop in a different
light.
KEV MARCUS: Whoever you are,
whether you're yellow, purple,
black, young, 5, 70, whatever,
just come have a good time, and,
hopefully, you're educated,
entertained and inspired.
JEFFREY BROWN: In January, Black
Violin will set off again on a
30-city U.S. tour.
In Cheverly, Maryland, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: And finally tonight,
another in our series of essays,
a tradition here at
the "NewsHour."
Robin Givhan is the fashion
critic of The Washington Post
and the winner of the Pulitzer
Prize for Criticism.
Tonight, she explores the sexism
behind some critiques of haute
couture.
ROBIN GIVHAN, Pulitzer Prize
Winner: Fashion makes people
nervous. Sometimes, they get
a little mean. They turn sexist.
When I say fashion, I don't mean
basic T-shirts and jeans, or
even some scrim of a dress that
leaves nothing to
the imagination.
I mean runway fashion, the
clothes that designers send out
on professional models, clothes
that
speak to the state of our
culture, where it's moving and
how women and men will want to
be perceived in the public
square six months from now and
beyond.
For example, there is a movement
in fashion inspired by blurring
gender lines. A lot of
designers have been part of this
conversation, but the most
aggressive has been Gucci's
Alessandro
Michele. He startled the fashion
industry with a men's wear
collection that included
ruffles, rows, and lace. Markers
of women's attire had been
applied to men. Here was social
change meted out in the form
of a men's wear revolution.
The Dutch designer Iris van
Herpen merges fashion with
technology in the search for
new materials and techniques.
Her clothes are otherworldly,
such as dresses that look
like waves captured mid-splash.
She's a futurist. And without
designers like her, we would all
still be in pantaloons and
hoopskirts. But when people see
her work, and Michele's, they
freak out. I know this
because these people write to
me. It's only natural to be
unnerved by something that is
unfamiliar, but other categories
of commerce regularly shock us,
without sending us into
a fit of aggrieved mocking.
For instance, we have been
informed that drones will soon
be delivering dog food to our
front
door. And the only question we
ask is, how fast? In other
industries, tentative leap
forwards encourage us to look
closer, but not fashion.
With fashion, the first reaction
from so many, from so many men
in particular, is to laugh.
Who would wear that? If there is
one common thread in all this
lampooning and fretting,
it's the belief that the mere
existence of strange and
expensive fashion is an affront.
The fact that a woman might
spend $20,000 on a Dior haute
couture dress pushes many
people to distraction. They seem
to believe that the existence of
such an expensive garment
endangers the existence of $100
ZARA dresses. I assure you the
$100 dress is safe.
I find this strange because I
don't detect similar outrage
over, say, fancy cars. We
don't presume that the social
fabric is being shredded by your
$100,000 Cadillac or your
$200,000 starter Bentley. But if
you build a special elevator for
them and then run for
president, well, you
will have a problem.
The cultural conversation about
these luxury cars typically
centers on their engineering,
their sleek lines and their
precision. That same
conversation could be had about
fashion.
At its highest level, fashion is
also about proportions and
lines, balance and details,
and considering performance.
But the conversation is
different, because we still tend
to think of cars as boys' toys,
and fashion is for girls.
Fashion has a lot of problems of
its own making. It isn't as
diverse as it should be. It
appeals to our insecurities. And
it struggles to balance
creativity with commerce.
But it is pervasive and
influential, so we should
examine it seriously. It is
beautiful
and entertaining, too, and we
should enjoy that. We should
treat it no better and no
worse than any other industry.
But we dismiss it at our peril,
because, when men end up with a
closet full of floral lace
shirts, they're going to want
to know how they got there.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: A new app and
Web site can spot earthquakes
sooner than ever by harnessing
social media and Internet
traffic. By locating where
people
are feeling the shakes of a
tremor, it can register a
dangerous seismic event up to 20
minutes before official reports.
You can find out more on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": Actress Jennifer
Lawrence talks to Charlie about
her
new dramatic comedy, "Joy."
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday: A galaxy far, far
away comes to a theater near
you. We take a look at the
new "Star Wars."
I'm Gwen Ifill. Join us online
and again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.